docs: build a plugin with AI (#2601)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/tutorials/build-ai-plugin.md

---
id: build-ai-plugin
title: Build a plugin with AI
sidebar_position: 40
description: Learn how to build a Grafana data source plugin and app plugin by prompting an AI coding assistant.
keywords:

>   - grafana

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - grafana
  - claude
```

1. [Prompt your AI tool to implement the data source](#2-prompt-your-ai-tool-to-implement-the-data-source).
1. [Scaffold an app plugin](#3-create-the-app-plugin-scaffold).
1. [Prompt your AI tool to build the app views](#4-prompt-your-ai-tool-to-build-the-app-list-view).

## Before you begin
 
Before you begin, make sure to:
 
- Install the latest version of Grafana.
- Install a current LTS version of Node.js.
- Install [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/).
- Install [Go](https://go.dev/) and [Mage](https://magefile.org/) for the data source plugin backend.
- Have an AI coding assistant available in your editor or terminal.
 
This tutorial uses the following API details:

- Station information URL: `https://barcelona.publicbikesystem.net/customer/ube/gbfs/v1/en/station_information`
- Station status URL: `https://barcelona.publicbikesystem.net/customer/ube/gbfs/v1/en/station_status`

No access token is required for the endpoints used in this tutorial.

### Useful tips to work with AI tools

:::important
**Do not let AI bootstrap the plugin. Make sure you're using `create-plugin`.**
:::

> When working with AI, you're steering the wheel! Do not to let your AI tool guess. Instead, give it clear prompts with guidelines and constraints, keep it inside Grafana plugin patterns, and verify each milestone in Grafana before moving on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with AI, you're steering the wheel! Do not let your AI tool guess. Instead, give it clear prompts with guidelines and constraints, keep it inside Grafana plugin patterns, and verify each milestone in Grafana before moving on.
```

These patterns help keep the AI useful:
 
- **Start with facts**: Give the API contract, plugin type, and hard constraints first.

> - **Ask it to for confirm before executing any task**: This helps catch drift before the AI edits files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Ask it to confirm before executing any task**: This helps catch drift before the AI edits files.
```

- **Tell it what not to do**: For example, no invented API fields and no direct app-to-API calls.
- **Ask it to name files before editing**: This makes review easier.
- **Keep prompts milestone-sized**: One milestone for the data source, one for the list page, one for the map page.

## 1. Create the data source plugin scaffold

:::important
**Do not let AI bootstrap the plugin. Make sure you're using `create-plugin` to perform the initial scaffolding.**
:::

### Scaffold the plugin and build the frontend 

Scaffold a data source plugin (in this case, let's call it `bcapi`) with a backend component:
 
```sh
npx @grafana/create-plugin@latest --plugin-type=datasource --backend --plugin-name=bcapi --org-name=myorg
```
 
Move into the plugin directory, install the dependencies, and follow any other prompt to update or fix your setup.
 
```sh
cd ./myorg-bcapi-datasource
npm install
```
 

> Build the frontend watcher:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start the frontend watcher:
```

 
```sh
npm run dev
```

**Keep this terminal tab open and open a new one to continue**.

### Build the plugin backend and start the development server

The Grafana development server runs in a Docker Linux container, so the backend binary must target Linux regardless of your local operating system. 

**Open a new terminal tab** and run the following to build the plugin backend code: 

On x86_64:

```sh
mage -v build:linux
```

On Arm64:

```sh
mage -v build:linuxARM64
```

:::note
Re-run this command every time you edit your backend files.
:::

Start the Grafana development server:
 
```sh
npm run server
```

Or, start it directly with Docker:

```sh
docker compose up
```

### Open Grafana

Open Grafana at [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).
 
Verify that the scaffold loads:
 
1. Go to **Connections** > **Data sources**.

> 1. Look for your new data source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add or select your new data source.
```

 
Tasks:
1. Review the scaffold and propose a short plan.
2. Then implement the plugin.
 
Requirements:
- Use the backend component in Go for all API requests
- Keep the plugin as a data source plugin with backend support
- Add a config editor with station information URL and station status URL fields (no default values)
- Add a query editor with two query types: station_status and station_information
- If station_information is selected, let the user choose a station from a dropdown
- Unwrap data.stations from the API response
- Return Grafana data frames that Grafana can render
- Add a health check for Save & Test
 
Important constraints:
- Do not call the Bicing API directly from the browser
- Do not invent extra endpoints or fields
- Keep the query model simple and typed
- Tell me which files you plan to change before editing them
```

Review the changes made, if any Go files have been modified, stop the running Grafana process and start it again:
 
```sh
npm run server
```

### Review the data source 

Verify the result:
 
1. Go to **Connections** > **Data sources** and select the data source.
1. If missing, enter the station information URL and station status URL.

> 1. Click **Save & Test**. If everything works, you see live station data. If there's any errors, run them by your tool until they're fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click **Save & Test**. If everything works, you see live station data. If there are any errors, run them by your tool until they're fixed.
```

1. Go back to **Explore** and run both query types.

## 3. Create the app plugin scaffold

:::important
**Do not let AI bootstrap the plugin. Make sure you're using `create-plugin`.**

> Make sure your to build the app plugin **in the same Grafana environment** as the data source plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure you build the app plugin **in the same Grafana environment** as the data source plugin.
```

:::

In a new terminal, create an app plugin:
 
```sh
npx @grafana/create-plugin@latest --plugin-type=app --plugin-name=bcapi --org-name=myorg --no-backend
```
 
Move into the new app plugin directory and install the dependencies:
 
```sh
cd myorg-bcapi-app
npm install
```
 
Start the frontend watcher:
 
```sh
npm run dev
```
 
**In a different tab**, start the Grafana development server:
 
```sh
npm run server
```

### Verify the app plugin

In your Grafana instance, go to **Connections** and check the app plugin has been scaffolded.

> ## 4. Prompt your AI tool to build the app list view

Reviewer: There is a missing link between app and datasources - we need to symlink the datasource into the app so that when you run the Grafana server in app folder it actually picks up / installs the datasource. This is happening here in our workshop https://github.com/grafana/grafana-con-2026-ai-inception-workshop/blob/8c51401c32fd06f765235ba9160b746efe64eaad/milestone2.sh#L64-L105

Reviewer: This can either be done manually or prompted in the app folder, something along the lines of

> I want to add dist folder of ../myorg-bcapi-datasource plugin to volumes of this plugin so that when I start this app plugin it has the datasource installed. Also add it to run unsigned.

but the prompt can also be a bit more detailed ofc.

Author: It worked for me but let me add it!

Author: @tolzhabayev - made some updates, LMK.

### Prompt the AI to add the list view 

Use this prompt in the app plugin directory:
 
```text
Help me build this Grafana app plugin.
 
Tasks:
1. Review the scaffold and propose a short plan.
2. Then implement the first app page.
 
Requirements:
- Keep only one page in the navigation to start with
- Let me select the Bicing data source at the top of the page
- Default to the first matching data source instance if one exists

> - Use the data source plugin to query station data

Reviewer: Do we need both of this lines or just keep one? They are the same to me.

- Use the data source plugin to query station data
- Query through the data source plugin

Author: Fixing!

---
id: build-ai-plugin
title: Build a plugin with AI
sidebar_position: 40
description: Learn how to build a Grafana data source plugin and app plugin by prompting an AI coding assistant.
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - ai
  - llm
  - datasource
  - app
---
 
# Build a plugin with AI 
 
This tutorial shows you how to build a Grafana plugin by prompting an AI coding assistant step by step. First, you create a data source plugin using the Barcelona Bicing API, and then you create an app plugin that uses that data source to show station data in a list and on a map.
 
In this tutorial, you'll:
 
1. [Scaffold a data source plugin with a backend component](#1-create-the-data-source-plugin-scaffold).
1. [Prompt your AI tool to implement the data source](#2-prompt-your-ai-tool-to-implement-the-data-source).
1. [Scaffold an app plugin](#3-create-the-app-plugin-scaffold).
1. [Prompt your AI tool to build the app views](#4-prompt-your-ai-tool-to-build-the-app-list-view).

## Before you begin
 
Before you begin, make sure to:
 

> - Install Grafana v10.0 or later.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is required since grafana is being provided by the dev environment? 

But as a general rule, we shouldnt recommend end of life versions of Grafana. We should promote people using latest major

- Install a current LTS version of Node.js.
- Install [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/).
- Install [Go](https://go.dev/) and [Mage](https://magefile.org/) for the data source plugin backend.
- Have an AI coding assistant available in your editor or terminal.
 
This tutorial uses the following API details:

- Station information URL: `https://barcelona.publicbikesystem.net/customer/ube/gbfs/v1/en/station_information`
- Station status URL: `https://barcelona.publicbikesystem.net/customer/ube/gbfs/v1/en/station_status`

No access token is required for the endpoints used in this tutorial.

### Useful tips to work with AI tools

:::important
**Do not let AI bootstrap the plugin. Make sure you're using `create-plugin`.**
:::

When working with AI, you're steering the wheel! Do not to let your AI tool guess. Instead, give it clear prompts with guidelines and constraints, keep it inside Grafana plugin patterns, and verify each milestone in Grafana before moving on.

These patterns help keep the AI useful:
 
- **Start with facts**: Give the API contract, plugin type, and hard constraints first.

> - **Ask for a short plan**: This helps catch drift before the AI edits files.

Reviewer 2: we say to do a plan, but have mixed references to this in the tutorial, for example we ask the llm to tell us which files it will change, but then the implication is that it has changed the files and we should restart the server?

Author: Reworded.

- **Tell it what not to do**: For example, no invented API fields and no direct app-to-API calls.
- **Ask it to name files before editing**: This makes review easier.

> - **Keep prompts milestone-sized**: One milestone for the data source, one for the list page, one for the map page.

Reviewer 2: Would this be better in a concepts section or broader than a tutorial?

Author: Well it's already a subsection in Before you begin...

Reviewer 2: I mean here https://grafana.com/developers/plugin-tools/key-concepts/

Author: As an individual doc? I dunno... Not sure it's our "job" to be thorough about that.

Author: I'd rather remove it.

## 1. Create the data source plugin scaffold

:::important

> **Do not let AI bootstrap the plugin. Make sure you're using `create-plugin`.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Do not let AI bootstrap the plugin. Make sure you're using `create-plugin` to perform the initial scaffolding.**
```

Reviewer 2: This is also a repeat of above?

 
```sh
npx @grafana/create-plugin@latest --plugin-type=datasource --backend --plugin-name=bcapi --org-name=myorg
```
 
Move into the plugin directory, install the dependencies, and follow any other prompt to update or fix your setup.
 
```sh
cd ./myorg-bcapi-datasource
npm install
```
 
Build the frontend watcher:
 
```sh
npm run dev
```

**Keep this terminal tab open and open a new one to continue**.

### Build the plugin backend and start the development server

The Grafana development server runs in a Docker Linux container, so the backend binary must target Linux regardless of your local operating system. 

**Open a new terminal tab** and run the following to build the plugin backend code: 

On x86_64:

```sh
mage -v build:linux
```

On Arm64:

```sh
mage -v build:linuxARM64
```

:::note
Re-run this command every time you edit your backend files.
:::

Start the Grafana development server:
 
```sh
npm run server
```

Or, start it directly with Docker:

```sh
docker compose up
```

### Open Grafana

Open Grafana at [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000).
 
Verify that the scaffold loads:
 
1. Go to **Connections** > **Data sources**.

> 1. Add your new data source.

Reviewer 2: it should already be provisioned as well?

Author: Rewording.

1. Go to **Explore** and select the data source you just created.
 
:::note
You don't see real data at this point. This is expected.

> :::

Reviewer 2: We could give instructions on how to query and show the screenshot with the constant

Author: I'd link to docs that explain it rather than document it here, it's out of scope.

 
You must follow the official Grafana plugin documentation and existing plugin scaffold patterns.
Do not invent API fields, routes, or Grafana plugin APIs.
If something is unclear, ask me a short question instead of guessing.
 
Facts you must use:
- Station information URL: https://barcelona.publicbikesystem.net/customer/ube/gbfs/v1/en/station_information
- Station status URL: https://barcelona.publicbikesystem.net/customer/ube/gbfs/v1/en/station_status
- Both endpoints return a response wrapper with data.stations
 
Data source plugin requirements:
- Keep API requests in the Go backend component
- Add a config editor with station information URL and station status URL fields (no default values)
- Add a query editor with two query types: station_status and station_information
- If `station_information` is selected, let the user choose a station from a dropdown
- Return Grafana data frames
- Add a working Save & Test health check
 
App plugin requirements:
- The app must use the data source plugin instead of calling the API directly
- The app should show a station list view
- The app should show station details on hover

> - The app should later add a second page with a map view

Reviewer 2: why are app requirements needed here?

Author: Removed!

```
 
Next, prompt the AI to build the data source in the data source plugin directory:
 
```text
Help me build this Grafana data source plugin.
 
Tasks:
1. Review the scaffold and propose a short plan.
2. Then implement the plugin.
 
Requirements:
- Use the backend component in Go for all API requests
- Keep the plugin as a data source plugin with backend support
- Add a config editor with station information URL and station status URL fields (no default values)
- Add a query editor with two query types: station_status and station_information
- If station_information is selected, let the user choose a station from a dropdown
- Unwrap data.stations from the API response
- Return Grafana data frames that Grafana can render
- Add a health check for Save & Test
 
Important constraints:
- Do not call the Bicing API directly from the browser
- Do not invent extra endpoints or fields
- Keep the query model simple and typed

> - Tell me which files you plan to change before editing them

Reviewer 2: Implies plan mode but not called out

```

> If the AI changed any Go files, stop the running Grafana process and start it again:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Review the changes made, if any Go files have been modified, stop the running Grafana process and start it again:
```

 
```sh
npm run server
```

### Review the data source 

Verify the result:
 
1. Go to **Connections** > **Data sources** and select the data source.
1. If missing, enter the station information URL and station status URL.
1. Click **Save & Test**. If everything works, you see live station data. If there's any errors, run them by your tool until they're fixed.
1. Go back to **Explore** and run both query types.

> As a suggestion, you can check that:

Reviewer 2: This section feels weird

Author: Removed.

 
- `src/plugin.json` still describes a data source plugin with a backend.
- The config editor stores the station information URL and station status URL in `jsonData`.
- The query editor exposes `station_status` and `station_information`.
- The backend calls the API and unwraps `data.stations`.
- The plugin returns Grafana data frames.

## 3. Create the app plugin scaffold

> :::important

Reviewer 2: do we have to keep repeating this?

Author: @academo said it was very important so that's why I keep repeating it. If it annoys you I can take remove this one, I have no string feelings for it.

**Do not let AI bootstrap the plugin. Make sure you're using `create-plugin`.**

Make sure your to build the app plugin **in the same Grafana environment** as the data source plugin.
:::

In a new terminal, create an app plugin:
 
```sh
npx @grafana/create-plugin@latest --plugin-type=app --plugin-name=bcapi --org-name=myorg --no-backend
```
 
Move into the new app plugin directory and install the dependencies:
 
```sh
cd myorg-bcapi-app
npm install
```
 
Start the frontend watcher:
 
```sh
npm run dev
```
 
**In a different tab**, start the Grafana development server:
 
```sh
npm run server
```

### Verify the app plugin

> In your Grafana instance, go to **Connections** > **Apps** and check the app plugin has been scaffolded.

Reviewer 2: This isn't a place in Grafana

Author: Reworded.

- Follow the official Grafana plugin documentation
- Do not bypass the data source plugin
- Tell me which files you plan to change before editing them
```

#### Verify the list view
 
1. Go to **Apps** and navigate to your app.
1. Confirm that the page loads.
1. Confirm that the app reads from the data source.
1. Hover over a station and verify that details appear.
 
### Prompt the AI to add the map page
 
After the list page works, use this prompt to add the map view:
 
```text
Add a second page to this Grafana app plugin.
 
Requirements:
- Add a page in the app navigation
- Show all stations on a map
- Show tooltip details on hover
- Use react-map-gl and OpenFreeMap
- Keep using the existing data source plugin for station data
- Keep the current list page working
 
Important constraints:
- Do not replace the data source with direct HTTP requests
- Keep the changes focused on adding the map page
```
 
#### Verify the map view
 
1. Reload Grafana.
1. Go to **Apps** and navigate to your app.
1. Go to the newly created map page from the app navigation.
1. Verify that stations appear on the map.
1. Verify that hover details match the station data.
 
## Troubleshooting
 

> ### The data source shows no data right after scaffolding

Reviewer 2: It should display a constant? But you do need to issue a query?

 
This is expected. The scaffold loads, but it does not query a real API yet.
 
### Backend changes do not show up
 
If the AI changed Go files, stop the running server and restart Grafana:
 
```sh
npm run server
```
 
### The app looks stale
 
Try the following:
 
- Make sure `npm run dev` is still running.
- Hard refresh the browser.
- Restart Grafana if the plugin metadata changed.
 
### The AI starts bypassing the data source
 
Stop the AI and correct the prompt. For this tutorial, the app plugin must read station data through the data source plugin. Don't let the app call the Bicing API directly.
 
## Next steps

You're done! 

Next, you can:
 
- [Build a data source plugin](./build-a-data-source-plugin.md)
- [Build a data source plugin backend component](./build-a-data-source-backend-plugin.md)

> - [Build an app plugin](./build-an-app-plugin.md)

Reviewer 2: These probably don't make sense as next steps? Maybe better to point towards more conceptual information to depend understanding

Author: Gotcha!
